## Abstract {.page_break_before}

Variation graphs have been proposed to represent human pan-genomes, offering reduced reference bias and better mapping accuracy than linear reference genomes. 
Structural variants (SVs) are significant components of genetic diversity and have been associated with diseases, but the technological challenges surrounding their representation and identification make their study difficult relative to point mutations. 
Still, thousands of SVs have been characterized and better catalogs continue to be generated thanks to new technologies.
We contend that variation graphs provide the most elegant representation of such catalogs and an effective means for leveraging them for short-read SV genotyping experiments.
In this work, we extended the vg toolkit for working with variation graphs to support SV genotyping, and showed that it is capable of genotyping insertions, deletions and inversions, even in the presence of small errors in the variant definition.
We then benchmarked vg across three high-quality sequence-resolved SV catalogs generated by recent studies.
vg was compared to state-of-the-art SV genotypers using simulated and real Illumina short reads.
On real data, vg produced the best genotype predictions systematically in all datasets.
Finally, we found that graphs constructed directly from aligned de novo assemblies can improve genotyping compared to graphs built from intermediate SV catalogs in the VCF format.
We experimented with assemblies from 12 yeast strains and showed that the incorporation of only a few assemblies in the graph sufficiently represents genetic variation across all strains.
Our results demonstrate the power of variation graphs for SV genotyping.
Beyond single nucleotide variants and short insertions/deletions, the vg toolkit now includes SV in its unified variant calling framework and provides a natural solution to integrate high-quality SV catalogs and assemblies.

