## Introduction 

A structural variant (SV) is a genomic mutation involving 50 or more base pairs.
SVs can take several forms such as deletions, insertions, inversions, translocations or other complex events.  
Due to their greater size, SVs often have a larger impact on phenotype than smaller events such as single nucleotide variants (SNVs) and small insertions and deletions (indels)[@doi:10.1038/ng.3834].
Indeed, SVs have long been associated with developmental disorders, cancer and other complex diseases and phenotypes[@doi:10.1038/nrg3373]. 

Despite their importance, SVs remain much more poorly studied than their smaller mutational counterparts.
This discrepancy stems from technological limitations.
Short read sequencing has provided the basis of most modern genome sequencing studies due to its high base-level accuracy and relatively low cost, however, it is poorly suited for discovering SVs.
The central obstacle is in mapping short reads to the human reference genome.
It is generally difficult or impossible to unambiguously map a short read if the sample whose genome is being analyzed differs substantially from the reference at the read's location.
The large size of SVs virtually guarantees that short reads derived from them will not map to the linear reference genome.
For example, if a read corresponds to sequence in the middle of a large reference-relative insertion, then there is no location in the reference that corresponds to a correct mapping.
The best result a read mapper could hope to produce would be to leave it unmapped.
Moreover, SVs often lie in repeat-rich regions, which further frustrate read mapping algorithms.

Short reads can be more effectively used to genotype known SVs.
This is important, as even though efforts to catalog SVs with other technologies have been highly successful, their cost currently prohibits their use in large-scale studies that require hundreds or thousands of samples such as disease association studies.
Traditional SV genotypers start from reads that were mapped to a reference genome, extracting aberrant mapping that might support the presence of the SV of interest.
Current methods such as SVTyper[@tag:svtyper] and the genotyping module of Delly[@tag:delly] (henceforth referred to as Delly Genotyper) typically focus on split reads and paired reads mapped too close or too far from each other.
These discordant reads are tallied and remapped to the reference sequence modified with the SV of interest in order to genotype deletions, insertions, duplications, inversions and translocations.
SMRT-SV v2 Genotyper uses a different approach: the reference genome is augmented with SV-containing sequences as alternate contigs and the resulting mappings are evaluated with a machine learning model trained for this purpose[@tag:audano2019].

The catalog of known SVs in human is quickly expanding.
Several large-scale projects have used short-read sequencing and extensive discovery pipelines on large cohorts, compiling catalogs with tens of thousands of SVs in humans[@tag:kgp2015; @tag:gonl], using split read and discordant pair based methods like Delly[@tag:delly] to find SVs using short read sequencing.
More recent studies using long-read or linked-read sequencing have produced large catalogs of structural variation, the majority of which was novel and sequence-resolved[@tag:audano2019; @tag:chaissonCHM; @tag:smrtsv; @doi:10.1038/s41467-017-01343-4; @doi:10.1038/nmeth.4366].
These technologies are also enabling the production of high-quality *de novo* genome assemblies[@doi:10.1038/nbt.4060; @tag:chaissonCHM], and large blocks of haplotype-resolved sequences[@doi:10.1038/nmeth.4035].
Such technical advances promise to expand the amount of known genomic variation in humans in the near future, and further power SV genotyping studies.
Representing known structural variation in the wake of increasingly larger datasets poses a considerable challenge, however.
VCF, the standard format for representing small variants, is unwieldy when used for SVs due its unsuitability for expressing nested or complex variants.
Another strategy consists in incorporating SVs into a linear pangenome reference via alt contigs, but it also has serious drawbacks.
Alt contigs tend to increase mapping ambiguity.
In addition, it is unclear how to scale this approach as SV catalogs grow.

Pangenomic graph reference representations offer an attractive approach for storing genetic variation of all types[@tag:patenGRrev]. 
These graphical data structures can seamlessly represent both SVs and point mutations using the same semantics.
Moreover, including known variants in the reference makes read mapping, variant calling and genotyping variant-aware.
This leads to benefits in terms of accuracy and sensitivity[@tag:vgnbt; @tag:bakeoff; @doi:10.1038/s41588-018-0316-4].
The coherency of this model allows different variant types to be called and scored simultaneously in a unified framework.

vg is the first openly available variation graph tool to scale to multi-gigabase genomes.
It provides read mapping, variant calling and visualization tools[@tag:vgnbt].
In addition, vg can build graphs both from variant catalogs in the VCF format and from assembly alignments.

Other tools have used genome graphs or pangenomes to genotype variants.
GraphTyper realigns mapped reads to a graph built from known SNVs and short indels using a sliding-window approach[@tag:graphtyper].
BayesTyper first builds a set of graphs from known variants including SVs, then genotypes variants by comparing the distribution of k-mers in the sequencing reads with the k-mers of haplotype candidate paths in the graph[@tag:bayestyper].
Paragraph builds a graph for each breakpoint of known variants [@tag:paragraph], then, for each breakpoint, it pulls out all nearby reads from the linear alignment and re-aligns them to the graph.
Genotypes are computed using the read coverage from the pair of breakpoint graphs corresponding to each SV.
These graph-based approaches showed clear advantages over standard methods that use only the linear reference.


In this work, we present a SV genotyping framework based on the variation graph model and implemented in the vg toolkit.
We show that this method is capable of genotyping known deletions, insertions and inversions, and that its performance is not inhibited by small errors in the specification of SV allele breakpoints.
We evaluated the genotyping accuracy of our approach using simulated and real Illumina reads and a pangenome built from SVs discovered in recent long-read sequencing studies[@doi:10.1101/281006;@tag:audano2019;@tag:hgsvc;@doi:10.1101/664623], 
We also compared vg's performance with state-of-the-art SV genotypers: SVTyper[@tag:svtyper], Delly Genotyper[@tag:delly], BayesTyper[@tag:bayestyper], Paragraph[@tag:paragraph] and SMRT-SV v2 Genotyper[@tag:audano2019].
Across the datasets we tested, which range in size from 26k to 97k SVs, vg is the best performing SV genotyper on real short-read data for all SV types in the majority of cases.
Finally, we demonstrate that a pangenome graph built from the alignment of *de novo* assemblies of diverse _Saccharomyces cerevisiae_ strains improves SV genotyping performance.
