## Results

### Structural variation in vg

We used vg to implement a straightforward SV genotyping pipeline.
Reads are mapped to the graph and used to compute the read support for each node and edge (see [Supplementary Information](#supplementary-information) for a description of the graph formalism).
Sites of variation are then identified using the snarl (aka "bubble") decomposition as described in [@tag:snarls], each resulting site being represented as a subgraph of the larger graph.
For each site, we determine the two most supported paths (haplotypes), and use their relative support in the read evidence to produce a genotype at that site (Figure {@fig:1}a).
We describe the pipeline in more detail in [Methods](#toil-vg).
We rigorously evaluated the accuracy of our method on a variety of datasets, and present these results in the remainder of this section.

![**Structural variation in vg.** 
a) vg uses the read coverage over possible paths to genotype variants in a bubble or more complex snarl. The cartoon depicts the case of an heterozygous insertion and an homozygous deletion. The algorithm is described in more details in [Methods](#toil-vg-call).
b) Simulation experiment. Each subplot shows a comparison of genotyping accuracy for four SV calling methods. Results are separated between types of variation (insertions, deletions, and inversions). The experiments were also repeated with small random errors introduced to the VCF to simulate breakpoint uncertainty. For each experiment, the y-axis shows the maximum F1 across different minimum quality thresholds.
SVTyper cannot genotype insertions, hence the missing line in the top panels.
](images/panel1.png){#fig:1}

### Simulated dataset

As a proof of concept, we simulated genomes and different types of SVs with a size distribution matching real SVs[@tag:hgsvc].
We compared vg against SVTyper, Delly, and BayesTyper across different levels of sequencing depth.
We also added some errors (1-10bp) to the location of the breakpoints to investigate their effect on genotyping accuracy (see [Methods](#simulation-experiment)).
The results are shown in Figure {@fig:1}b.

When using the correct breakpoints, vg tied with Delly as the best genotyper for deletions, and with BayesTyper as the best genotyper for insertions.
For inversions, vg was the second best genotyper after BayesTyper.
The differences between the methods were the most visible at lower sequencing depth. 
In the presence of 1-10 bp errors in the breakpoint locations, the performance of Delly and BayesTyper dropped significantly (Figure {@fig:1}b).
The dramatic drop for BayesTyper can be explained by its k-mer-based approach that requires precise breakpoints.
In contrast, vg was only slightly affected by the presence of errors.
For vg, the F1 scores for all SV types decreased no more than 0.07.
Overall, these results show that vg is capable of genotyping SVs and is robust to breakpoint inaccuracies in the input VCF.

### HGSVC dataset

72,485 structural variants from The Human Genome Structural Variation Consortium (HGSVC) were used to benchmark the genotyping performance of vg against the three other SV genotyping methods.
This high-quality SV catalog was generated from three samples using a consensus from different sequencing, phasing, and variant calling technologies[@tag:hgsvc]. 
The three individual samples represent different human populations: Han Chinese (HG00514), Puerto-Rican (HG00733), and Yoruban Nigerian (NA19240).
We used these SVs to construct a graph with vg and as input for the other genotypers.
Using short sequencing reads, the SVs were genotyped and compared with the genotypes in the original catalog (see [Methods](#hgsvc-analysis)).

First we compared the methods using simulated reads for HG00514.
This represents the ideal situation where the SV catalog exactly matches the SVs supported by the reads.
While vg outperformed Delly and SVTyper, BayesTyper showed the best F1 score and precision-recall trade-off (Figures {@fig:2}a and {@fig:hgsvc-sim-geno}, Table {@tbl:hgsvc}).
When restricting the comparisons to regions not identified as tandem repeats or segmental duplications, the genotyping predictions were significantly better for all methods, with vg almost as good as BayesTyper on deletions (F1 of 0.944 vs 0.955).
We observed similar results when evaluating the presence of an SV call instead of the exact genotype (Figures {@fig:2}a and {@fig:hgsvc-sim}).
Overall, both graph-based methods, vg and BayesTyper, outperformed the other two methods tested.

![**Structural variants from the HGSVC and Genome in a Bottle datasets**. 
HGSVC: Simulated and real reads were used to genotype SVs and compared with the high-quality calls from Chaisson et al.[@tag:hgsvc].
Reads were simulated from the HG00514 individual.
Using real reads, the three HG00514, HG00733, and NA19240 individuals were tested.
GIAB: Real reads from the HG002 individual were used to genotype SVs and compared with the high-quality calls from the Genome in a Bottle consortium[@doi:10.1038/sdata.2016.25;@doi:10.1101/281006;@doi:10.1101/664623].
a) Maximum F1 score for each method (color), across the whole genome or focusing on non-repeat regions (x-axis). 
We evaluated the ability to predict the presence of an SV (transparent bars) and the exact genotype (solid bars).
Results are separated across panels by variant type: insertions and deletions.
SVTyper cannot genotype insertions, hence the missing bars in the top panels.
b) Maximum F1 score for different size classes when evaluating on the presence of SVs across the whole genome.
c) Size distribution of SVs in the HGSVC and GIAB catalogs.
](images/panel2.png){#fig:2 width="90%"}

We then repeated the analysis using real Illumina reads from the three HGSVC samples to benchmark the methods on a more realistic experiment.
Here, vg clearly outperformed other approaches (Figures {@fig:2}a and {@fig:hgsvc-real-geno}).
In non-repeat regions and across the whole genome, the F1 scores and precision-recall AUC were higher for vg compared to other methods.
For example, for deletions in non-repeat regions, the F1 score for vg was 0.801 while the second best method, Delly, had a F1 score of 0.692.
We observed similar results when evaluating the presence of an SV call instead of the exact genotype (Figures {@fig:2}a and {@fig:hgsvc-real}).
In addition, vg's performance was stable across the spectrum of SV sizes (Figure {@fig:2}b-c).
Figure {@fig:hgsvc-ex} shows an example of an exonic deletion that was correctly genotyped by vg but not by the other methods.

![**Exonic deletion in the HGSVC dataset correctly genotyped by vg**. 
a) Visualization of the HGSVC graph as augmented by reads aligned by vg at a locus harboring a 51 bp homozygous deletion in the UTR region of the LONRF2 gene.
At the bottom, a horizontal black line represents the topologically sorted nodes of the graph.
Black rectangles represent edges found in the graph.
Above this rendering of the topology, the reference path from GRCh38 is shown (in green).
Red and blue bars represent reads mapped to the graph.
Thin lines in the reference path and read mappings highlight relative gaps (either insertions or deletions) against the full graph.
The vg read mappings show consistent coverage even over the deletion.
b) Reads mapped to the linear genome reference GRCh38 using bwa in the same region.
Reads contain soft-clipped sequences and short insertions near the deletion breakpoints.
Part of the deleted region is also covered by several reads, potentially confusing traditional SV genotypers.
](images/hgsvc-ex-del.png){#fig:hgsvc-ex  width="80%"}


### Other long-read datasets

#### Genome in a Bottle Consortium

The Genome in a Bottle (GiaB) consortium is currently producing a high-quality SV catalog for an Ashkenazim individual (HG002)[@doi:10.1038/sdata.2016.25;@doi:10.1101/281006;@doi:10.1101/664623].
Dozens of SV callers operating on datasets from short, long, and linked reads were used to produce this set of SVs.
We evaluated the SV genotyping methods on this sample as well using the GIAB VCF, which also contains parental calls (HG003 and HG004), all totalling 30,224 SVs.
vg performed similarly on this dataset as on the HGSVC dataset, with a F1 score of 0.75 for both insertions and deletions in non-repeat regions (Figures {@fig:2}, {@fig:giab-geno} and {@fig:giab}, and Table {@tbl:giab}).
As before, other methods produced lower F1 scores in most cases, although Delly and BayesTyper predicted better genotypes for deletions in non-repeat regions.

#### SMRT-SV v2 catalog and training data [@tag:audano2019]

A recent study by Audano et al. generated a catalog of 97,368 SVs (referred as SVPOP below) using long-read sequencing across 15 individuals[@tag:audano2019].
These variants were then genotyped from short reads across 440 individuals using the SMRT-SV v2 genotyper, a machine learning-based tool implemented for that study.
The SMRT-SV v2 genotyper was trained on a pseudo-diploid genome constructed from high quality assemblies of two haploid cell lines (CHM1 and CHM13) and a single negative control (NA19240).
We first used vg to genotype the SVs in this two-sample training dataset using 30X coverage reads, and compared the results with the SMRT-SV v2 genotyper.
vg was systematically better at predicting the presence of an SV for both SV types, but SMRT-SV v2 produced better genotypes for deletions (see Figures {@fig:chmpd-svpop}, {@fig:chmpd-geno} and {@fig:chmpd}, and Table {@tbl:chmpd}). 
To compare vg and SMRT-SV v2, we then genotyped SVs from the entire SVPOP catalog with both methods, using the read data from the three HGSVC samples described above.
Given that the the SVPOP catalog contains these three samples, we once again evaluated accuracy by using the long-read genotypes as a baseline of comparison.

Compared to SMRT-SV v2, vg had a better precision-recall curve and a higher F1 for both insertions and deletions (SVPOP in Figures {@fig:chmpd-svpop} and {@fig:svpop}, and Table {@tbl:svpop}).
Of note, SMRT-SV v2 produces *no-calls* in regions where the read coverage is too low, and we observed that its recall increased when filtering these regions out the input set.
Interestingly, vg performed well even in regions where SMRT-SV v2 produced *no-calls* (Figure {@fig:svpop-regions} and Table {@tbl:svpop-regions}).
Audano et al. discovered 217 sequence-resolved inversions using long reads, which we attempted to genotype.
vg correctly predicted the presence of around 14% of the inversions present in the three samples (Table {@tbl:svpop}).
Inversions are often complex, harboring additional variation that makes their characterization and genotyping challenging.

![**Structural variants from SMRT-SV v2 [@tag:audano2019]**.
The pseudo-diploid genome built from two CHM cell lines and one negative control sample was originally used to train SMRT-SV v2 in Audano et al.[@tag:audano2019].
It contains 16,180 SVs.
The SVPOP panel shows the combined results for the HG00514, HG00733, and NA19240 individuals, three of the 15 individuals used to generate the high-quality SV catalog in Audano et al. [@tag:audano2019].
Here, we report the maximum F1 score (y-axis) for each method (color), across the whole genome or focusing on non-repeat regions (x-axis). 
We evaluated the ability to predict the presence of an SV (transparent bars) and the exact genotype (solid bars).
Genotype information is not available in the SVPOP catalog hence genotyping performance could not be evaluated.
](images/chmpd-svpop-best-f1.png){#fig:chmpd-svpop}

### Graphs from alignment of *de novo* assemblies

We can construct variation graphs directly from whole genome alignments <span style="color:red">(WGA)</span> of multiple *de novo* assemblies[@tag:vgnbt].
This bypasses the need for generating an explicit variant catalog relative to a linear reference, which could be a source of error due to the reference bias inherent in read mapping and variant calling.
Genome alignments from graph-based software such as Cactus [@doi:10.1101/gr.123356.111] can contain complex structural variation that is extremely difficult to represent, let alone call, outside of a graph, but which is nevertheless representative of the actual genomic variation between the aligned assemblies.
We sought to establish if graphs built in this fashion provide advantages for SV genotyping.

To do so, we analyzed public sequencing datasets for 12 yeast strains from two related clades (*S. cerevisiae* and *S. paradoxus*) [@doi:10.1038/ng.3847].
We distinguished two different strain sets, in order to assess how the completeness of the graph affects the results. 
For the *all strains set*, all 12 strains were used, with *S.c. S288C* as the reference strain.
For the *five strains set*, *S.c. S288C* was used as the reference strain, and we selected two other strains from each of the two clades (see [Methods](#yeast-graph-analysis)).
We compared genotyping results from <span style="color:red">a WGA-derived graph (*cactus graph*) with results from a VCF-derived graph (*VCF graph*)</span>~~two different types of genome graphs~~.
The ~~first graph (~~*VCF graph* ~~)~~ was created from the linear reference genome of the *S.c. S288C* strain and a set of SVs relative to this reference strain in VCF format identified from the other assemblies in the respective strain set by three methods: Assemblytics [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btw369], AsmVar [@doi:10.1186/s13742-015-0103-4] and paftools [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bty191].
The ~~second graph (~~*cactus graph* ~~)~~ was derived from a multiple genome alignment of the strains in the respective strain set using Cactus [@doi:10.1101/gr.123356.111].
The *VCF graph* is mostly linear and highly dependent on the reference genome.
In contrast, the *cactus graph* is structurally complex and relatively free of reference bias.

First, we tested our hypothesis that the *cactus graph* has higher mappability due to its better representation of sequence diversity among the yeast strains (see [Supplementary Information](#mappability-comparison-between-yeast-graphs)).
Generally, more reads mapped to the *cactus graph* with high identity (Figures {@fig:panel3}a and {@fig:panel5}a) and high mapping quality (Figures {@fig:panel3}b and {@fig:panel5}b) than to the *VCF graph*.
<span style="color:red">On average, 88%, 79%, and 68% of reads mapped to the *all strain cactus graph* with an identity of at least 50%, 90%, and 100%, respectively, compared to only 77%, 57%, and 23% of reads on the *all strain VCF graph*.
Similarly, 88% of reads mapped to the *all strain cactus graph* with a mapping quality of at least 30 compared to only 80% of reads on the *all strain VCF graph*.</span>

Next, we compared the SV genotyping performance of both graph types.
We mapped short reads from the 11 non-reference strains to both graphs and <span style="color:red">genotyped</span>~~called~~ variants for each strain using the vg toolkit's variant calling module (see [Methods](#toil-vg-call)).
There is no gold standard <span style="color:red">available</span>~~call set~~ for these samples <span style="color:red">to compare against which renders an evaluation using recall, precision and F1 score impossible.</span>
<span style="color:red">Therefore,</span> ~~so~~ we used an indirect measure of SV <span style="color:red">genotyping</span>~~calling~~ accuracy.
We evaluated each SV <span style="color:red">genotype</span>~~call~~ set based on the alignment of reads to a *sample graph* constructed from the <span style="color:red">genotype</span>~~call~~ set (see [Methods](#calling-and-genotyping-of-svs)).
<span style="color:red">Conceptually, the sample graph represents the sample's diploid genome by starting out from the reference genome and augmenting it with the genotype results.</span>
If a given <span style="color:red">genotype</span>~~call~~ set is correct, we expect that reads from the same sample will be mapped with high identity and confidence to the corresponding sample graph.
To specifically quantify mappability in SV regions we excluded reads that produced identical mapping quality and identity on both sample graphs and an empty sample graph containing the linear reference only (see [Methods](#calling-and-genotyping-of-svs) and Figure {@fig:panel6} for results from all reads).
Then, we analyzed the average delta in mapping identity and mapping quality of the remaining short reads between both sample graphs (Figures {@fig:4}a and b).

For most of the strains, we observed an improvement in mapping identity of the short reads on the *cactus sample graph* compared to the *VCF sample graph*.
The mean improvement in mapping identity across the strains <span style="color:red">(for reads differing in mapping identity)</span> was 8.0% and 8.5% for the *all strains set* graphs and the *five strains set* graphs, respectively.
Generally, the improvement in mapping identity was larger for strains in the *S. paradoxus* clade (mean of 13.7% and 13.3% for the two strain sets, respectively) than for strains in the *S. cerevisiae* clade (mean of 3.3% and 4.4%).
While the higher mapping identity indicated that the *cactus graph* represents the reads better (Figure {@fig:4}a), the higher mapping quality confirmed that this did not come at the cost of added ambiguity or a more complex graph (Figure {@fig:4}b).
For most strains, we observed an improvement in mapping quality of the short reads on the *cactus sample graph* compared to the *VCF sample graph* (mean improvement across the strains of 1.0 and 5.7 for the two strain sets, respectively).

![**SV genotyping comparison.**
Short reads from all 11 non-reference yeast strains were used to genotype SVs contained in the *cactus graph* and the *VCF graph*. 
Subsequently, sample graphs were generated from the resulting SV <span style="color:red">genotype</span>~~call~~ sets. 
The short reads were aligned to the sample graphs and reads with identical mapping identity and quality across both sample graphs and an additional empty sample graph were removed from the analysis.
The quality of the remaining divergent alignments was used to ascertain SV genotyping performance.
The bars show the average delta in mapping identity (a) and in mapping quality (b) of divergent short reads aligned to the sample graphs derived from the *cactus graph* and the *VCF graph*.
Positive values denote an improvement of the *cactus graph* over the *VCF graph*.
Colors represent the two strain sets and transparency indicates whether the respective strain was part of the *five strains set*.
](images/panel4.png){#fig:4}

