## Discussion

<!-- Discuss why vg is doing better -->
vg was the most accurate SV genotyper in our benchmarks, overall.
These results show that variant calling benefits from variant-aware read mapping, a finding consistent with previous graph-based studies[@tag:vgnbt; @tag:bakeoff; @doi:10.1038/s41588-018-0316-4; @tag:graphtyper; @tag:bayestyper].
<!-- Other advantages: SV representation, unified variant calling. -->
In addition to its variant-aware read mapping, vg offers additional advantages.
Its unified framework calls and scores different variant types simultaneously.
For variant interpretation in particular, a comprehensive and unified characterization of the genomic variation will be extremely valuable. 
Variation graphs that contain known SNVs, indels and SVs could serve as a richer reference for large scale projects that use short-read sequencing.
More and more large-scale projects are sequencing the genomes of thousands or hundreds of thousands of individuals and could benefit from such a framework, e.g. the Pancancer Analysis of Whole Genomes[@url:https://dcc.icgc.org/pcawg], the Genomics England initiative[@url:https://www.genomicsengland.co.uk], and the TOPMed consortium[@url:https://www.nhlbiwgs.org/].
In contrast to incorporating SVs into a linear pan-genome reference via alt contigs, the graph structure can represent SVs as succinctly as possible.
Alt contigs often contain redundant sequence resulting in increased mapping ambiguity and involves custom pipelines and non-standard metadata formats linking the contigs back to the reference.
These issues make the alt contigs difficult to use, maintain, and scale as SV catalogs continue to expand.

<!-- Input data quality: "sequence-resolved", break-point fine-tuning. -->
Our method requires near-breakpoint resolution in the variant library used to construct the graph.
Simulations have shown that SV genotyping with vg is robust to errors of as much as 10 bp in breakpoint location.
Variants with higher uncertainty in the breakpoint location, for example discovered through read coverage analysis, cannot be safely added to the graph.
By being robust to some errors in the breakpoint location, vg was more accurate in real data compared to the other genome graph method tested, BayesTyper, which assumes sequence-resolved variants as input.
Of note, vg is also capable of fine-tuning SV breakpoints using an augmentation step that modifies the graph based on the read alignment.
While this augmentation approach was developed to discover novel SNVs and indels, simulations showed that it is capable of correcting erroneous SV breakpoints (Figure {@fig:simerror-bkpt} and Table {@tbl:simerror-bkpt}).

<!-- Already superior but will only get better with new vg dev -->
The vg toolkit is under active development.
Read mapping is an area of constant improvement, in terms of both computational efficiency and accuracy.
One technique under development is the application of haplotype information for the improvement of read mapping and variant calling. 
We believe that this technique stands to benefit SV genotyping with vg, as haplotype information might enable inference at the scale of SVs when using short reads.
In our benchmark, other methods were superior in a handful datasets and situations, primarily when genotyping deletions.
However, even in most of these cases, vg had the best accuracy when evaluating only the presence or absence of each variant call.
This suggests that the performance shortfall can be attributed to the genotyping algorithm rather than the mapping pipeline.
We hope to address these issues in a future release.

<!-- Benefits of de novo assemblies -->
Our results suggest that constructing a graph from de novo assembly alignment instead of a VCF leads to better SV genotyping.
High quality de novo assemblies for human are becoming more and more common, for example from optimized mate-pair libraries[@tag:denmark] or long-read sequencing[@doi:10.1038/nbt.4060].
For an optimal representation of genomic variation, we expect the future graphs to include information from the alignment of numerous de novo assemblies.
We are presently working on scaling our pipeline to human-sized genome assemblies.
Aligning assembled contigs to existing variation graphs, like to ones created from SVs catalogs, is still experimental but could generate a genome graph augmented with both existing variant databases and new high-quality assemblies.

## Conclusion

In this study, the vg toolkit was compared to existing SV genotypers across several high-quality SV catalogs.
We showed that its implementation of variation graphs lead to a better SV genotyping compared to methods that rely on read mapping to a linear reference genome or a variation graph approach that requires exact sequence-resolved variants.
This work introduces a flexible strategy to integrate the growing number of SVs being discovered with higher resolution technologies into the unified framework of variation graphs.
This study also shows the benefit of starting directly from de novo assemblies rather than variant catalogs to integrate SVs in genome graphs.
